RFC 0000: RFC Process
=====================

:Status: Proposed
:Author: Howard Henson
:Created: 2026-07-23
:Target: Project governance

Summary
-------

Material changes to hgraph's public contract begin with a numbered RFC in this
directory. The proposal is reviewed before implementation becomes the basis of
the design, and the accepted RFC is maintained as the durable explanation of
the resulting contract.

Scope
-----

An RFC is required for a new or materially changed:

* public C++ or Python type;
* operator family or dispatch convention;
* runtime, scheduling, persistence, or wire-format contract;
* downstream extension or binary-interface facility; or
* cross-project capability that will be owned by ``hg_cpp``.

Small fixes that restore documented behaviour, private refactoring, tests, and
editorial corrections do not require an RFC.

Repository ownership
--------------------

The RFC belongs in the repository that owns the implementation. A downstream
requirement that may need a generic hgraph facility is first explored in its
own repository. Once proposed for the core, its core RFC is placed here and the
downstream document links to it rather than maintaining a second normative
specification.

Numbering and filenames
-----------------------

RFC numbers are allocated monotonically and are never reused. The filename is
``rfc_NNNN_short_title.rst`` except for this process RFC. A rejected,
withdrawn, or superseded RFC retains its number and history.

Statuses
--------

``Proposed``
   The design is under review or its implementation has not yet merged.

``Accepted``
   The implementation and its conformance tests have merged. The RFC describes
   the shipped contract and records any differences from the original
   proposal.

``Rejected``
   The proposal was considered and declined, with the reason recorded.

``Withdrawn``
   The author stopped pursuing the proposal.

``Superseded``
   A later RFC replaces this one; both documents link to each other.

Workflow
--------

1. Create a topic branch and add the proposed RFC as the first commit. The RFC
   is ``Proposed`` and contains no implementation.
2. Review the public contract, ownership boundary, performance implications,
   C++/Python parity, compatibility, and acceptance criteria.
3. Supply the implementation and tests in subsequent commits on a PR branch.
   Update the RFC in those commits whenever implementation experience changes
   the design.
4. The implementation PR must identify its RFC. Once the implementation is
   accepted for merge, update the RFC status to ``Accepted`` in the same change
   so code and design cannot land with contradictory states.
5. Later behavioural changes update the accepted RFC or, for a material
   redesign, introduce a superseding RFC.

All work follows the repository policy in ``AGENTS.md``: use a non-default
branch and merge through a pull request. A change spanning hgraph and a
downstream extension uses separate linked PRs.

Required structure
------------------

Each feature RFC contains, as applicable:

* metadata: number, title, status, author, creation date, and target;
* summary and motivation;
* ownership boundary;
* detailed C++ and Python contract;
* runtime representation and operator/dispatch semantics;
* compatibility, migration, and serialization consequences;
* performance and memory considerations;
* alternatives considered and unresolved questions;
* acceptance criteria and test plan;
* implementation status after work begins; and
* stable references to standards, papers, or prior art.

Policy selectors
----------------

A scalar policy known at wiring time should normally select an operator
implementation through overload resolution. A genuinely time-varying policy is
normally represented by a graph that switches between those implementations.
An RFC proposing a per-tick branch inside a generic node must justify why
dispatch or graph composition cannot express the contract and include
performance evidence.

Amendments
----------

Editorial clarifications may update an RFC directly. A change to accepted
semantics must be visible in the RFC history and implementation PR. Historical
motivation and rejected alternatives should not be erased merely because the
final API is smaller than the initial proposal.
